README.md, before:

## cse-dtyo

This \LaTeX -template has been used by various people at department 
since the late 1990's, and has slowly improved over time.  It is still 
somewhat rough at the edges, but hopefully will be helpful in reducing 
some of the pain involved in writing a diploma thesis.

Contributors to the template include Mika Korhonen (original author), 
Pekka Pietikäinen, Christian Wieser, Teemu Tokola and Juha Kylmänen.  If 
you make any improvements to this template, ask us at ouspg @ ee.oulu.fi 
for a merge.

The template was updated during the summer of 2013 by Juha Kylmänen.

### LoC

 * 2014-03-10
  * New front page
 * 2013
  * Changed \chapter's \newpage to \clearpage to prevent floats from wandering to the beginning of the next chapter
  * Added [hyphens] to the url package to prevent margin overflow with long urls
  * Added multirow package to make multirow and multicolumns possible
  * Added some helpful source code comments
  * Makefile for pdflatex and bibtex to automate pdf compilation
  * Abbreviations are autosorted by the Makefile
  * Added a bit of extra padding to the sample table

Commit message:

Update instructions to suggest fork & pull.

README.md, after:

## cse-dtyo

This \LaTeX -template has been used by various people at department 
since the late 1990's, and has slowly improved over time.  It is still 
somewhat rough at the edges, but hopefully will be helpful in reducing 
some of the pain involved in writing a diploma thesis.

Contributors to the template include Mika Korhonen (original author), 
Pekka Pietikäinen, Christian Wieser, Teemu Tokola and Juha Kylmänen.

The template has no official maintainer as such, but as many people
at the Oulu University Secure Programming Group have contributed to it
at various times, we are hosting the semi-official department 
version at https://github.com/ouspg/cse-dtyo.

We kindly ask for students using this template to improve this template,
and share the improvements, so that others may benefit. The easiest 
way to get your changes merged is to fork and send a pull
request (or ask us at ouspg @ ee.oulu.fi) on github.

The last major update to this template was during the summer of 2013 by Juha
Kylmänen.

### LoC

 * 2014-03-10
  * New front page
 * 2013
  * Changed \chapter's \newpage to \clearpage to prevent floats from wandering to the beginning of the next chapter
  * Added [hyphens] to the url package to prevent margin overflow with long urls
  * Added multirow package to make multirow and multicolumns possible
  * Added some helpful source code comments
  * Makefile for pdflatex and bibtex to automate pdf compilation
  * Abbreviations are autosorted by the Makefile
  * Added a bit of extra padding to the sample table
